When the news of this suspension of arms arrived at Kensington, it
occasioned the greatest surprise, the greatest clamour--for even the
Monarch acted surprise! The Foreign Ministers acquainted those of
England that it was concluded, or certainly would be. The English
with great truth disavowed all knowledge, and protested entire
disbelief of it. They not only had not been entrusted with the
secret, but saw their master affect equal indignation, and encouraged
by that dissimulation, ventured to insist on his permitting them to
write to foreign Courts that he disavowed the transaction. Even this
he granted. He went further: he told Dabreu, the Spanish Minister,
that he would show him the rough draft of a letter which he had
prepared to send to his son, with a positive command to fight. It was
true, he had written such a letter; it is no less true that he never
sent it.

As the Dictator of the Convention disavowed it, as the father
disclaimed the son, it was natural for those who suffered by the
act, and for those who hated the actor, to break out against both.
The King of Prussia said we had undone him, without mending our own
situation. The Princess of Wales, Lord Hardwicke, and Legge threw the
strongest reflections on the Duke; the last, indeed, with appearance
of reason, being extremely hampered, as Chancellor of the Exchequer,
by this transaction. How should he be able, he said, next winter
to propose the Hessian troops, whose hands were now tied up from
assisting us? or must he wave the subsidy to them, when they were
starving in our cause? The others went further; they called his Royal
Highness’s Generalship in question; he was brave indeed, but that was
all; he had wasted a good Army; had beaten the French, and did not
know it.

But the most indecent in personal invectives was Baron Munchausen,
the Hanoverian Minister in England--a man reckoned one of their
ablest heads, and who had hitherto always comported himself with
civility and inoffensively. He went so far as to call for a Council
to examine the Duke’s behaviour; and Lord Hardwicke, to extend the
insult, or to divide it amongst many, desired the whole Cabinet
Council, not merely the junto, might meet: the affair was too
serious. Thither Munchausen brought copies of his own letters to the
Duke, to prove that his Royal Highness had acted without authority.
Mr. Pitt observed, that they proved the direct contrary; and he, who
certainly had never managed the Duke, nor stood on any good terms
with him, acted a part nobly honest: when the King told him that he
had given his son no _orders_ for this treaty, Pitt replied with
firmness, “But _full powers_, Sir; very _full powers_.”